Isaac Asimov (/ˈaɪzɨk ˈæzɨmɒv/ eye-zək az-ə-mov;[2] born Isaak Yudovich Ozimov, Russian: Исаак Юдович Озимов; c. January 2, 1920[1] – April 6, 1992) was an American author and professor of biochemistry at Boston University, best known for his works of science fiction and for his popular science books. Asimov was one of the most prolific writers of all time, having written or edited more than 500 books and an estimated 90,000 letters and postcards.[3] His works have been published in all ten major categories of the Dewey Decimal System (although his only work in the 100s—which covers philosophy and psychology—was a foreword for The Humanist Way).[4]
Asimov is widely considered a master of hard science fiction and, along with Robert A. Heinlein and Arthur C. Clarke, he was considered one of the "Big Three" science fiction writers during his lifetime.[5] Asimov's most famous work is the Foundation Series;[6] his other major series are the Galactic Empire series and the Robot series. The Galactic Empire novels are explicitly set in earlier history of the same fictional universe as the Foundation Series. Later, beginning with Foundation's Edge, he linked this distant future to the Robot and Spacer stories, creating a unified "future history" for his stories much like those pioneered by Robert A. Heinlein and previously produced by Cordwainer Smith and Poul Anderson.[7] He wrote many short stories, among them "Nightfall", which in 1964 was voted by the Science Fiction Writers of America the best short science fiction story of all time. Asimov wrote the Lucky Starr series of juvenile science-fiction novels using the pen name Paul French.[8]
The prolific Asimov also wrote mysteries and fantasy, as well as much non-fiction. Most of his popular science books explain scientific concepts in a historical way, going as far back as possible to a time when the science in question was at its simplest stage. He often provides nationalities, birth dates, and death dates for the scientists he mentions, as well as etymologies and pronunciation guides for technical terms. Examples include Guide to Science, the three volume set Understanding Physics, Asimov's Chronology of Science and Discovery, as well as works on astronomy, mathematics, the Bible, William Shakespeare's writing and chemistry.
Asimov was a long-time member and Vice President of Mensa International, albeit reluctantly; he described some members of that organization as "brain-proud and aggressive about their IQs."[9] He took more joy in being president of the American Humanist Association.[10] The asteroid 5020 Asimov, a crater on the planet Mars,[11] a Brooklyn, New York elementary school, and one Isaac Asimov literary award are named in his honor.


Biography

Asimov was born sometime between October 4, 1919 and January 2, 1920[1] in Petrovichi in the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (near the modern border with Belarus) to Anna Rachel Berman Asimov and Judah Asimov, a family of Jewish millers. While his exact date of birth is uncertain, Asimov himself celebrated it on January 2.[1]
The family name derives from озимые (ozimiye), a Russian word for winter grains in which his great-grandfather dealt, to which a patronymic suffix was added. His name in Russian was originally Isaak Ozimov (Russian: Исаак Озимов); but he was later known in Russia as Ayz'ek Azimov (Айзек Азимов),[12] a Russian Cyrillic adaptation of the American English pronunciation.
Asimov had two younger siblings; a sister, Marcia (born Manya,[13] June 17, 1922-April 2, 2011[14]), and a brother, Stanley (July 25, 1929-August 16, 1995[15]), who was vice-president of New York Newsday.[16][17]
His family emigrated to the United States when he was three years old. Since his parents always spoke Yiddish and English with him, he never learned Russian.[18] Growing up in Brooklyn, New York City, Asimov taught himself to read at the age of five[19] and remained fluent in Yiddish as well as English.[20] Asimov wrote of his father, "My father, for all his education as an Orthodox Jew, was not Orthodox in his heart," and "he didn't recite the myriad prayers prescribed for every action, and he never made any attempt to teach them to me."[21]
His parents owned a succession of candy stores, and everyone in the family was expected to work in them.
[edit]Education and career
Asimov began reading science fiction pulp magazines at a young age.[22] His father, as a matter of principle, forbade reading the pulps, as he considered them to be trash, but Asimov persuaded him that the science fiction magazines had "Science" in the title, so they were educational. Around the age of eleven, he began to write his own stories, and by age nineteen—after he discovered science fiction fandom—he was selling stories to the science fiction magazines. John W. Campbell, then editor of Astounding Science Fiction, had a strong formative influence on Asimov and eventually became a personal friend.[23]
Asimov attended New York City public schools, including Boys High School, in Brooklyn, New York.[24] Graduating at 15, he went on to Seth Low Junior College, a branch of Columbia University in Brooklyn designed to admit larger numbers of Jewish and Italian-American students at Columbia College, then the institution's primary undergraduate school for men. Originally a zoology major, Asimov changed his subject to chemistry after his first semester as he disapproved of "dissecting an alley cat". After Seth Low Junior College closed in 1938, Asimov finished his BS degree at University Extension (later the Columbia University School of General Studies) in 1939. When he failed to secure admission to medical school, he applied to the graduate program in chemistry at Columbia; initially rejected and then only accepted on a probationary basis, Asimov completed his MA in chemistry in 1941 and earned a PhD in biochemistry in 1948. In between, he spent three years during World War II working as a civilian at the Philadelphia Navy Yard's Naval Air Experimental Station. After the war ended, he was drafted into the U.S. Army, serving for almost nine months before receiving an honorable discharge. In the course of his brief military career, he rose to the rank of corporal on the basis of his typing skills, and narrowly avoided participating in the 1946 atomic bomb tests at Bikini Atoll.


L. Sprague de Camp, Robert A. Heinlein, and Isaac Asimov, Philadelphia Navy Yard, 1944
After completing his doctorate, Asimov joined the faculty of the Boston University School of Medicine, with which he remained associated thereafter.[25] From 1958, this was in a non-teaching capacity, as he turned to writing full-time (his writing income had already exceeded his academic salary). Being tenured, he retained the title of associate professor, and in 1979 the university honored his writing by promoting him to full professor of biochemistry. Asimov's personal papers from 1965 onward are archived at the university's Mugar Memorial Library, to which he donated them at the request of curator Howard Gottlieb. The collection fills 464 boxes, or seventy-one meters of shelf space.
[edit]Personal life
Asimov married Gertrude Blugerman (1917, Canada–1990, Boston) on July 26, 1942. They had two children, David (b. 1951) and Robyn Joan (b. 1955). In 1970 they separated and Asimov moved back to New York, this time to Manhattan, where he lived for the rest of his life. He immediately began seeing Janet O. Jeppson, and married her two weeks after his divorce from Gertrude in 1973.[26]
Asimov was a claustrophile: he enjoyed small, enclosed spaces.[27] In the third volume of his autobiography, he recalls a childhood desire to own a magazine stand in a New York City Subway station, within which he could enclose himself and listen to the rumble of passing trains while reading.[28]
Asimov was afraid of flying,[29] only doing so twice in his entire life (once in the course of his work at the Naval Air Experimental Station, and once returning home from the army base in Oahu in 1946)[29] He seldom traveled great distances, partly because his aversion to flying complicated the logistics of long-distance travel. This phobia influenced several of his fiction works, such as the Wendell Urth mystery stories and the Robot novels featuring Elijah Baley. In his later years, he found he enjoyed traveling on cruise ships, and on several occasions he became part of the cruises' "entertainment", giving science-themed talks on ships such as the RMS Queen Elizabeth 2.[29]
Asimov was an able public speaker and was a frequent fixture at science fiction conventions, where he was friendly and approachable.[29] He patiently answered tens of thousands of questions and other mail with postcards, and was pleased to give autographs. He was of medium height, stocky, with mutton chop whiskers and a distinct New York accent. His physical dexterity was very poor. He never learned to swim or ride a bicycle; however, he did learn to drive a car after he moved to Boston. In his humor book Asimov Laughs Again, he describes Boston driving as "anarchy on wheels".[30]
Asimov's wide interests included his participation in his later years in organizations devoted to the comic operas of Gilbert and Sullivan[29] and in The Wolfe Pack,[31] a group of devotees of the Nero Wolfe mysteries written by Rex Stout. Many of his short stories mention or quote Gilbert and Sullivan.[32] He was a prominent member of the Baker Street Irregulars, the leading Sherlock Holmes society.[29] He was also a member of the all-male literary banqueting club the Trap Door Spiders, which served as the basis of his fictional group of mystery solvers the Black Widowers.[33]
In 1984, the American Humanist Association (AHA) named him the Humanist of the Year. He was one of the signers of the Humanist Manifesto.[34]From 1985 until his death in 1992, he served as president of the AHA, an honorary appointment; his successor was his friend and fellow writer Kurt Vonnegut. He was also a close friend of Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry, and earned a screen credit on Star Trek: The Motion Picture for advice he gave during production (generally, confirming to Paramount Pictures that Roddenberry's ideas were legitimate science-fictional extrapolation).
Asimov was a founding member of the Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the Paranormal (CSICOP), now known as the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry (CSI).[35][36] The organization lists him as a fellow.[37]
[edit]Illness and death
Asimov suffered a heart attack in 1977, and had triple bypass surgery in December 1983. When he died in New York City on April 6, 1992, his brother Stanley reported heart and kidney failure as the cause of death.[38] He was survived by his second wife, Janet, and his children from his first marriage. Ten years after his death, Janet Asimov's edition of Asimov's autobiography, It's Been a Good Life, revealed that the myocardial and renal complications were the result of an infection by HIV, which he had contracted from a blood transfusion received during his bypass operation.[39] Janet Asimov wrote in the epilogue of It's Been a Good Life that Asimov's doctors advised him against going public, warning that the anti-AIDS prejudice would likely extend to his family members. Asimov's family considered disclosing his condition after his death, but the controversy that erupted when Arthur Ashe announced his own HIV infection (also contracted from a blood transfusion during heart surgery) convinced them otherwise. Ten years later, after most of Asimov's doctors had died, Janet and Robyn Asimov agreed that the HIV story should be made public.[40]
[edit]Writings

[edit]Overview


Rowena Morrill's portrait of Asimov enthroned with symbols of his life's work
Laws of robotics
Three Laws of Robotics
by Isaac Asimov
(in culture)
Tilden's Laws of Robotics
by Mark Tilden
Related topics
Roboethics Ethics of AI Friendly AI Machine ethics
v t e
Asimov's career can be divided into several time periods. His early career, dominated by science fiction, began with short stories in 1939 and novels in 1950. This lasted until about 1958, all but ending after publication of The Naked Sun. He began publishing nonfiction in 1952, co-authoring a college-level textbook called Biochemistry and Human Metabolism. Following the brief orbit of the first man-made satellite Sputnik I by the USSR in 1957, his production of nonfiction, particularly popular science books, greatly increased, with a consequent drop in his science fiction output. Over the next quarter century, he wrote only four science fiction novels. Starting in 1982, the second half of his science fiction career began with the publication of Foundation's Edge. From then until his death, Asimov published several more sequels and prequels to his existing novels, tying them together in a way he had not originally anticipated, making a unified series. There are, however, many inconsistencies in this unification, especially in his earlier stories.[41]
Asimov believed that his most enduring contributions would be his "Three Laws of Robotics" and the Foundation Series (see Yours, Isaac Asimov, p. 329). Furthermore, the Oxford English Dictionary credits his science fiction for introducing the words positronic (an entirely fictional technology), psychohistory (which is also used for a different study on historical motivations) and robotics into the English language. Asimov coined the term robotics without suspecting that it might be an original word; at the time, he believed it was simply the natural analogue of words such as mechanics and hydraulics, but for robots. Unlike his word psychohistory, the word robotics continues in mainstream technical use with Asimov's original definition. Star Trek: The Next Generation featured androids with "positronic brains" giving Asimov full credit for "inventing" this fictional technology. His fictional writings for space and time are similar to the writings of Brian W Aldiss, Poul Anderson and Gregory Benford.
[edit]Science fiction
Asimov first began reading the science fiction pulp magazines sold in his family's confectionery store in 1929. He came into contact with science fiction fandom in the mid-1930s, particularly the circle that became the Futurians. He began writing his first science fiction story, "Cosmic Corkscrew", in 1937, but failed to finish it until June 1938, when he was inspired to do so after a visit to the offices of Astounding Science Fiction. He finished "Cosmic Corkscrew" on June 19, and submitted the story in person to Astounding editor John W. Campbell two days later. Campbell rejected "Cosmic Corkscrew", but encouraged Asimov to keep trying, and Asimov did so. Asimov sold his third story, "Marooned Off Vesta", to Amazing Stories magazine in October, and it appeared in the March 1939 issue. He continued to write and sometimes sell stories to the science fiction pulps.
In 1941, he published his 32nd story, "Nightfall", which has been described as one of "the most famous science-fiction stories of all time".[42] In 1968 the Science Fiction Writers of America voted "Nightfall" the best science fiction short story ever written.[38] In his short story collection Nightfall and Other Stories he wrote, "The writing of 'Nightfall' was a watershed in my professional career ... I was suddenly taken seriously and the world of science fiction became aware that I existed. As the years passed, in fact, it became evident that I had written a 'classic'."
"Nightfall" is an archetypal example of social science fiction, a term coined by Asimov to describe a new trend in the 1940s, led by authors including Asimov and Heinlein, away from gadgets and space opera and toward speculation about the human condition.
By 1941 Asimov had begun selling regularly to Astounding, which was then the field's leading magazine. From 1943 to 1949, all of his published science fiction appeared in Astounding.
In 1942 he published the first of his Foundation stories—later collected in the Foundation Trilogy: Foundation (1951), Foundation and Empire (1952), and Second Foundation (1953)—which recount the collapse and rebirth of a vast interstellar empire in a universe of the future. Taken together, they are his most famous work of science fiction, along with the Robot Series. Many years later, due to pressure by fans on Asimov to write another,[25] he continued the series with Foundation's Edge (1982) and Foundation and Earth (1986), and then went back to before the original trilogy with Prelude to Foundation (1988) and Forward the Foundation (1992). The series features his fictional science of Psychohistory in which the future course of the history of large populations can be predicted.
His positronic robot stories—many of which were collected in I, Robot (1950)—were begun at about the same time. They promulgated a set of rules of ethics for robots (see Three Laws of Robotics) and intelligent machines that greatly influenced other writers and thinkers in their treatment of the subject. Asimov notes in one of his biographical pieces that he was largely inspired by the almost relentless tendency of robots up to that time to fall consistently into a Frankenstein plot in which they destroyed their creator. One such robot story, a short titled "The Bicentennial Man", was made into a film starring Robin Williams.
The 2004 film I, Robot, starring Will Smith, was based on a script by Jeff Vintar entitled Hardwired, with Asimov's ideas incorporated later after acquiring the rights to the I, Robot title.[43] It is not related to the I, Robot script by Harlan Ellison, who collaborated with Asimov himself to create a version that captured the spirit of the original. Asimov is quoted as saying that Ellison's screenplay would lead to "the first really adult, complex, worthwhile science fiction movie ever made". The screenplay was published in book form in 1994, after hopes of seeing it in film form were becoming slim.
Besides movies, his Foundation and Robot stories have inspired other derivative works of science fiction literature, many by well-known and established authors such as Roger MacBride Allen, Greg Bear, Gregory Benford and David Brin. These appear to have been done with the blessing, and often at the request of, Asimov's widow Janet Asimov.
In 1948 he also wrote a spoof chemistry article, "The Endochronic Properties of Resublimated Thiotimoline". At the time, Asimov was preparing his own doctoral dissertation, and for the oral examination to follow that. Fearing a prejudicial reaction from his graduate school evaluation board at Columbia University, Asimov asked his editor that it be released under a pseudonym, yet it appeared under his own name because of a mistake by the publisher. During his oral examination shortly thereafter, Asimov grew concerned at the scrutiny he received. At the end of the examination, one evaluator turned to him, smiling, and said "What can you tell us, Mr. Asimov, about the thermodynamic properties of the compound known as thiotimoline". The hysterically laughing Asimov was led out of the room then. After a 5-minute or so wait, he was summoned back into the Examination Room and congratulated as "Dr. Asimov".
In 1949, the book publisher Doubleday's science fiction editor Walter I. Bradbury accepted Asimov's unpublished novelette "Grow Old Along With Me" (40,000 words) for publication, but requested that it be extended to a full novel of 70,000 words. The book appeared under the Doubleday imprint in January 1950 with the title of Pebble in the Sky. The Doubleday company went on to publish five more original science fiction novels by Asimov in the 1950s, along with the six juvenile Lucky Starr novels, the latter under the pseudonym of "Paul French". Doubleday also published collections of Asimov's short stories, beginning with The Martian Way and Other Stories in 1955. The early 1950s also saw the Gnome Press company publishing one collection of Asimov's positronic robot stories as I, Robot and his Foundation stories and novelettes as the three books of the Foundation Trilogy. More positronic robot stories were republished in book form as The Rest of the Robots.
When new science fiction magazines, notably Galaxy magazine and The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, appeared in the 1950s, Asimov began publishing short stories in them as well. He would later refer to the 1950s as his "golden decade". A number of these stories are included in his Best of anthology, including "The Last Question" (1956), on the ability of humankind to cope with and potentially reverse the process of entropy. It was his personal favorite and considered by many to be equal to "Nightfall". Asimov wrote of it in 1973:
Why is it my favorite? For one thing I got the idea all at once and didn't have to fiddle with it; and I wrote it in white-heat and scarcely had to change a word. This sort of thing endears any story to any writer. Then, too, it has had the strangest effect on my readers. Frequently someone writes to ask me if I can give them the name of a story, which they think I may have written, and tell them where to find it. They don't remember the title but when they describe the story it is invariably "The Last Question". This has reached the point where I recently received a long-distance phone call from a desperate man who began, 'Dr. Asimov, there's a story I think you wrote, whose title I can't remember—' at which point I interrupted to tell him it was "The Last Question" and when I described the plot it proved to be indeed the story he was after. I left him convinced I could read minds at a distance of a thousand miles.
In December 1974, former Beatle Paul McCartney approached Asimov and asked him if he could write the screenplay for a science-fiction movie musical. McCartney had a vague idea for the plot and a small scrap of dialogue; he wished to make a film about a rock band whose members discover they are being impersonated by a group of extraterrestrials. The band and their impostors would likely be played by McCartney's group Wings, then at the height of their career. Intrigued by the idea, although he was not generally a fan of rock music, Asimov quickly produced a "treatment" or brief outline of the story. He adhered to McCartney's overall idea, producing a story he felt to be moving and dramatic. However, he did not make use of McCartney's brief scrap of dialogue, and probably as a consequence, McCartney rejected the story. The treatment now exists only in the Boston University archives.
Beginning in 1977, Asimov lent his name to Isaac Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine (now Asimov's Science Fiction) and penned an editorial for each issue. There was also a short-lived Asimov's SF Adventure Magazine and a companion Asimov's Science Fiction Anthology reprint series, published as magazines (in the same manner as the stablemates Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine's and Alfred Hitchcock's Mystery Magazine's "anthologies").
[edit]Popular science
During the late 1950s and 1960s, Asimov shifted gears somewhat, and substantially decreased his fiction output (he published only four adult novels between 1957's The Naked Sun and 1982's Foundation's Edge, two of which were mysteries). At the same time, he greatly increased his non-fiction production, writing mostly on science topics; the launch of Sputnik in 1957 engendered public concern over a "science gap", which Asimov's publishers were eager to fill with as much material as he could write.
Meanwhile, the monthly Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction invited him to continue his regular non-fiction column, begun in the now-folded bimonthly companion magazine Venture Science Fiction Magazine, ostensibly dedicated to popular science, but with Asimov having complete editorial freedom. The first of the F&SF columns appeared in November 1958, and they followed uninterrupted thereafter, with 399 entries, until Asimov's terminal illness. These columns, periodically collected into books by his principal publisher, Doubleday, helped make Asimov's reputation as a "Great Explainer" of science, and were referred to by him as his only pop-science writing in which he never had to assume complete ignorance of the subjects at hand on the part of his readers. The popularity of his first wide-ranging reference work, The Intelligent Man's Guide to Science, also allowed him to give up most of his academic responsibilities and become essentially a full-time freelance writer.
Asimov wrote several essays on the social contentions of his time, including "Thinking About Thinking" and "Science: Knock Plastic" (1967).
The great variety of information covered in Asimov's writings once prompted Kurt Vonnegut to ask, "How does it feel to know everything?" Asimov replied that he only knew how it felt to have the reputation of omniscience—"Uneasy". (See In Joy Still Felt, chapter 30.) In the introduction to his story collection Slow Learner, Thomas Pynchon admitted that he relied upon Asimov's science popularizations (and the Oxford English Dictionary) to provide his knowledge of entropy.
Asimov also contributed science article entries to several encyclopaedias, including Groliers, The Encyclopaedia Americana, The Encyclopædia Britannica and the World Book Encyclopaedia Yearbook.
The feelings of friendship and respect between Asimov and Arthur C. Clarke were demonstrated by the so-called "Clarke-Asimov Treaty of Park Avenue", put together as they shared a cab ride in New York. This stated that Asimov was required to insist that Clarke was the best science fiction writer in the world (reserving second-best for himself), while Clarke was required to insist that Asimov was the best science writer in the world (reserving second-best for himself).[44] Thus the dedication in Clarke's book Report on Planet Three (1972) reads: "In accordance with the terms of the Clarke-Asimov treaty, the second-best science writer dedicates this book to the second-best science-fiction writer."
[edit]Coined terms
Asimov coined the term "robotics" in his 1941 story Liar!,[45] though he later remarked that he believed then that he was merely using an existing word, as he stated in Gold ("The Robot Chronicles"), though while acknowledging the Oxford Dictionary reference, he incorrectly states that the word was first printed about one third of the way down the first column of page 100, Astounding Science Fiction, March 1942 printing of his short story "Runaround" .[46][47]
Asimov also coined the term "spome" in a paper entitled, “There’s No Place Like Spome” in Atmosphere in Space Cabins and Closed Environments,[48] originally presented as a paper to the American Chemical Society on September 13, 1965. It refers to any system closed with respect to matter and open with respect to energy capable of sustaining human life indefinitely.
[edit]Other writings
In addition to his interest in science, Asimov was also greatly interested in history. Starting in the 1960s, he wrote 14 popular history books, most notably The Greeks: A Great Adventure (1965), The Roman Republic (1966), The Roman Empire (1967), The Egyptians (1967) and The Near East: 10,000 Years of History (1968).
He published Asimov's Guide to the Bible in two volumes—covering the Old Testament in 1967 and the New Testament in 1969— and then combined them into one 1,300-page volume in 1981. Complete with maps and tables, the guide goes through the books of the Bible in order, explaining the history of each one and the political influences that affected it, as well as biographical information about the important characters. His interest in literature manifested itself in several annotations of literary works, including Asimov's Guide to Shakespeare (1970), Asimov's Annotated Paradise Lost (1974), and The Annotated Gulliver's Travels (1980).
Asimov was also a noted mystery author and a frequent contributor to Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine. He began by writing science fiction mysteries such as his Wendell Urth stories but soon moved on to writing "pure" mysteries. He only published two full-length mystery novels but he wrote a fair number of stories about the Black Widowers, a group of men who met monthly for dinner, conversation, and a puzzle. He got the idea for the Widowers from his own association in a stag group called the Trap Door Spiders and all of the main characters (with the exception of the waiter, Henry, whom he admitted resembled Wodehouse's Jeeves) were modeled after his closest friends.[49]
Toward the end of his life, Asimov published a series of collections of limericks, mostly written by himself, starting with Lecherous Limericks, which appeared in 1975. Limericks: Too Gross, whose title displays Asimov's love of puns, contains 144 limericks by Asimov and an equal number by John Ciardi. He even created a slim volume of Sherlockian limericks (and embarrassed one fan by autographing her copy with an impromptu limerick that rhymed 'Nancy' with 'romancy'). Asimov featured Yiddish humor in Azazel, The Two Centimeter Demon. The two main characters, both Jewish, talk over dinner, or lunch, or breakfast, about anecdotes of "George" and his friend Azazel. Asimov's Treasury of Humor is both a working joke book and a treatise propounding his views on humor theory. According to Asimov, the most essential element of humor is an abrupt change in point of view, one that suddenly shifts focus from the important to the trivial, or from the sublime to the ridiculous.
Particularly in his later years, Asimov to some extent cultivated an image of himself as an amiable lecher. In 1971, as a response to the popularity of sexual guidebooks such as The Sensuous Woman (by "J") and The Sensuous Man (by "M"), Asimov published The Sensuous Dirty Old Man under the byline "Dr. 'A'" (although his full name was printed on the paperback edition, first published 1972).
Asimov published two volumes of autobiography: In Memory Yet Green (1979) and In Joy Still Felt (1980). A third autobiography, I. Asimov: A Memoir, was published in April 1994. The epilogue was written by his widow Janet Asimov a decade after his death. It's Been a Good Life (2002), edited by Janet, is a condensed version of his three autobiographies. He also published three volumes of retrospectives of his writing, Opus 100 (1969), Opus 200 (1979), and Opus 300 (1984).
In 1987, the Asimovs co-wrote How to Enjoy Writing: A Book of Aid and Comfort. In it they offer advice on how to maintain a positive attitude and stay productive when dealing with discouragement, distractions, rejection and thick-headed editors. The book includes many quotations, essays, anecdotes and husband-wife dialogues about the ups and downs of being an author.
Asimov and Star Trek creator Gene Roddenberry developed a unique relationship during Star Trek's initial launch in the late 1960s. Asimov wrote a critical essay on Star Trek's scientific accuracy for TV Guide magazine. Roddenberry retorted respectfully with a personal letter explaining the limitations of accuracy when writing a weekly series. Asimov corrected himself with a follow-up essay to TV Guide claiming despite its inaccuracies, that Star Trek was a fresh and intellectually challenging science fiction television show. The two remained friends to the point where Asimov even served as an advisor on a number of Star Trek projects.
In 1973, Asimov published a proposal for calendar reform, called the World Season Calendar. It divides the year into four seasons (named A–D) of 13 weeks (91 days) each. This allows days to be named, e.g., "D-73" instead of December 1. An extra Year Day is added for a total of 365 days.[50]
[edit]Awards and recognition
1957 – Thomas Alva Edison Foundation Award, for Building Blocks of the Universe
1960 – Howard W. Blakeslee Award from the American Heart Association for The Living River
1962 – Boston University's Publication Merit Award
1963 – special Hugo Award for "adding science to science fiction" for essays published in the Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction
1963 – Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences[51]
1965 – James T. Grady Award of the American Chemical Society (now called the James T. Grady-James H. Stack Award for Interpreting Chemistry)
1966 – Best All-time Novel Series Hugo Award for the Foundation series
1967 – Westinghouse Science Writing Award
1972 – Nebula Award for Best Novel for The Gods Themselves[52]
1973 – Hugo Award for Best Novel for The Gods Themselves[53]
1973 – Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel for The Gods Themselves[53]
1977 – Hugo Award for Best Novelette for The Bicentennial Man
1977 – Nebula Award for Best Novelette for The Bicentennial Man
1981 – An asteroid, 5020 Asimov, was named in his honor
1983 – Hugo Award for Best Novel for Foundation's Edge[54]
1983 – Locus Award for Best Science Fiction Novel for Foundation's Edge[54]
1987 – Nebula Grand Master award, a lifetime achievement award[55]
1992 – Hugo Award for Best Novelette for Gold
1995 – Hugo Award for Best Non-Fiction Book for I. Asimov: A Memoir
1996 – A 1946 Retro-Hugo for Best Novel of 1945 was given at the 1996 WorldCon to "The Mule", the 7th Foundation story, published in Astounding Science Fiction
1997 – Posthumous induction into the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame
2009 – A crater on the planet Mars, Asimov,[11] was named in his honor
2010 – In the US Congress bill about the designation of the National Robotics Week as an annual event, a tribute to Isaac Asimov is as follows:
"Whereas the second week in April each year is designated as `National Robotics Week', recognizing the accomplishments of Isaac Asimov, who immigrated to America, taught science, wrote science books for children and adults, first used the term robotics, developed the Three Laws of Robotics, and died in April, 1992: Now, therefore, be it resolved..."[56]
14 honorary doctorate degrees from various universities
[edit]Writing style

[edit]Characteristics
One of the most common impressions of Asimov's fiction work is that his writing style is extremely unornamented. In 1980, science fiction scholar James Gunn, professor emeritus of English at the University of Kansas wrote of I, Robot:[57]
Except for two stories—"Liar!" and "Evidence"—they are not stories in which character plays a significant part. Virtually all plot develops in conversation with little if any action. Nor is there a great deal of local color or description of any kind. The dialogue is, at best, functional and the style is, at best, transparent ... The robot stories and, as a matter of fact, almost all Asimov fiction—play themselves on a relatively bare stage.
Gunn observes that there are places where Asimov's style rises to the demands of the situation; he cites the climax of "Liar!" as an example. Sharply drawn characters occur at key junctures of his storylines: Susan Calvin in "Liar!" and "Evidence", Arkady Darell in Second Foundation, Elijah Baley in The Caves of Steel and Hari Seldon in the Foundation prequels. Asimov addresses this criticism at the beginning of his book Nemesis:[58]
I made up my mind long ago to follow one cardinal rule in all my writing—to be clear. I have given up all thought of writing poetically or symbolically or experimentally, or in any of the other modes that might (if I were good enough) get me a Pulitzer prize. I would write merely clearly and in this way establish a warm relationship between myself and my readers, and the professional critics—Well, they can do whatever they wish.
Some details of Asimov's imaginary future technology as he described in the 1940s and 1950s have not aged well. For example, he described powerful robots and computers from the distant future using punched cards or punched tape and engineers using slide rules. In one dramatic scene in Foundation and Empire, a character gets the news by buying a paper at a vending machine. Of course, this charge could be leveled at virtually any writer of science fiction and has little critical impact.
In addition, his stories have occasional internal contradictions, for example, names and dates given in the Foundation Series do not always agree with one another. Sometimes such errors may be plausible within the story as mistakes the characters make, because often characters in Asimov stories are not fully informed about their own situations. Other contradictions resulted from the many years elapsed between the time Asimov began the Foundation series and when he resumed working on it; occasionally, advances in scientific knowledge forced him to revise his own fictional history.
Other than books by Gunn and Patrouch, there is a relative dearth of "literary" criticism on Asimov (particularly when compared to the sheer volume of his output). Cowart and Wymer's Dictionary of Literary Biography (1981) gives a possible reason:
His words do not easily lend themselves to traditional literary criticism because he has the habit of centering his fiction on plot and clearly stating to his reader, in rather direct terms, what is happening in his stories and why it is happening. In fact, most of the dialogue in an Asimov story, and particularly in the Foundation trilogy, is devoted to such exposition. Stories that clearly state what they mean in unambiguous language are the most difficult for a scholar to deal with because there is little to be interpreted.
In fairness, Gunn's and Patrouch's respective studies of Asimov both take the stand that a clear, direct prose style is still a style. Gunn's 1982 book goes into considerable depth commenting upon each of Asimov's novels published to that date. He does not praise all of Asimov's fiction (nor does Patrouch), but he does call some passages in The Caves of Steel "reminiscent of Proust." When discussing how that novel depicts night falling over futuristic New York City, Gunn says that Asimov's prose "need not be ashamed anywhere in literary society".
Although he prided himself on his unornamented prose style (for which he credited Clifford D. Simak as an early influence), Asimov also enjoyed giving his longer stories complicated narrative structures, often by arranging chapters in non-chronological ways. Some readers have been put off by this, complaining that the nonlinearity is not worth the trouble and adversely affects the clarity of the story. For example, the first third of The Gods Themselves begins with Chapter 6, then backtracks to fill in earlier material.[59] (John Campbell advised Asimov to begin his stories as late in the plot as possible. This advice helped Asimov create "Reason", one of the early Robot stories. See In Memory Yet Green for details of that time period.) Patrouch found that the interwoven and nested flashbacks of The Currents of Space did serious harm to that novel, to such an extent that only a "dyed-in-the-kyrt[60] Asimov fan" could enjoy it. Asimov's tendency to contort his timelines is perhaps most apparent in his later novel Nemesis, in which one group of characters live in the "present" and another group starts in the "past", beginning fifteen years earlier and gradually moving toward the time period of the first group.
[edit]Limitations
Alien life
Asimov was also criticized for the general absence of sexuality and of extraterrestrial life in his science fiction. Asimov once explained that his reluctance to write about aliens came from an incident early in his career when Astounding's editor John Campbell rejected one of his science fiction stories because the alien characters were portrayed as superior to the humans. The nature of the rejection led him to believe that Campbell may have based his bias towards humans in stories on a real-world racial bias. Unwilling to write only weak alien races, and concerned that a confrontation would jeopardize his and Campbell's friendship, he decided he would not write about aliens at all.[24] Nevertheless, in response to these criticisms he wrote The Gods Themselves, which contains aliens and alien sex. The book won the Nebula Award for Best Novel in 1972,[52] and the Hugo Award for Best Novel in 1973.[53] Asimov said that of all his writings, he was most proud of the middle section of The Gods Themselves, the part that deals with those themes.[61]
In the Hugo Award-winning novella Gold, Asimov describes an author clearly based on himself who has one of his books (The Gods Themselves) adapted into a "compu-drama", essentially photo-realistic computer animation. The director criticizes the fictionalized Asimov ("Gregory Laborian") for having an extremely nonvisual style making it difficult to adapt his work, and the author explains that he relies on ideas and dialogue rather than description to get his points across.
Gender and social issues
Others have criticized him for a lack of strong female characters in his early work. In his autobiographical writings, such as Gold ("Women and Science Fiction"), he acknowledges this and responds by pointing to inexperience. His later novels, written with more female characters but in essentially the same prose style as his early SF stories, brought this matter to a wider audience. For example, the August 25, 1985 Washington Post's "Book World" section reports of Robots and Empire as follows:[citation needed]
In 1940, Asimov's humans were stripped-down masculine portraits of Americans from 1940, and they still are. His robots were tin cans with speedlines like an old Studebaker, and still are; the Robot tales depended on an increasingly unworkable distinction between movable and unmovable artificial intelligences, and still do. In the Asimov universe, because it was conceived a long time ago, and because its author abhors confusion, there are no computers whose impact is worth noting, no social complexities, no genetic engineering, aliens, arcologies, multiverses, clones, sin or sex; his heroes (in this case R. Daneel Olivaw, whom we first met as the robot protagonist of The Caves of Steel and its sequels) feel no pressure of information, raw or cooked, as the simplest of us do today; they suffer no deformation from the winds of the Asimov future, because it is so deeply and strikingly orderly.
It may be noted, however, that in fact The Naked Sun (1957) deals with social issues as a core part of its central setting and motivation, depicts genetic engineering in the guise of eugenics as a fundamental part of that society, presents the reader with inverted arcologies where a single person is the focal point of the artificial environment as well as a hero who hails from a "normal" arcology on Earth. Meanwhile, totally artificial birth, although not specifically cloning, is the aim of the leaders of the society, sexual want is the major driving force of the main female character (albeit veiled in 1950s sensibilities), and the entire story is used to make the point that too much order is ultimately a stagnant dead end to be avoided.[citation needed]
[edit]Views

[edit]Religion
Isaac Asimov was an atheist, a humanist, and a rationalist.[62] He did not oppose religious conviction in others, but he frequently railed against superstitious and pseudoscientific beliefs that tried to pass themselves off as genuine science. During his childhood, his father and mother observed Orthodox Jewish traditions, though not as stringently as they had in Petrovichi; they did not, however, force their beliefs upon young Isaac. Thus he grew up without strong religious influences, coming to believe that the Torah represented Hebrew mythology in the same way that the Iliad recorded Greek mythology. As his books Treasury of Humor and Asimov Laughs Again record, Asimov was willing to tell jokes involving God, Satan, the Garden of Eden, Jerusalem, and other religious topics, expressing the viewpoint that a good joke can do more to provoke thought than hours of philosophical discussion.
For a brief while, his father worked in the local synagogue to enjoy the familiar surroundings and, as Isaac put it, "shine as a learned scholar"[63] versed in the sacred writings. This scholarship was a seed for his later authorship and publication of Asimov's Guide to the Bible, an analysis of the historic foundations for both Old and New Testaments. For many years, Asimov called himself an atheist; however, he considered the term somewhat inadequate, as it described what he did not believe rather than what he did. Eventually, he described himself as a "humanist" and considered that term more practical. He did however continue to identify himself as a non-observant Jew[64] as stated in his introduction to Jack Dann's anthology of Jewish science fiction, Wandering Stars: "I attend no services and follow no ritual and have never undergone that curious puberty rite, the bar mitzvah. It doesn't matter. I am Jewish."
In his last volume of autobiography, Asimov wrote, "If I were not an atheist, I would believe in a God who would choose to save people on the basis of the totality of their lives and not the pattern of their words. I think he would prefer an honest and righteous atheist to a TV preacher whose every word is God, God, God, and whose every deed is foul, foul, foul."[65] The same memoir states his belief that Hell is "the drooling dream of a sadist" crudely affixed to an all-merciful God; if even human governments were willing to curtail cruel and unusual punishments, wondered Asimov, why would punishment in the afterlife not be restricted to a limited term? Asimov rejected the idea that a human belief or action could merit infinite punishment. If an afterlife existed, he claimed, the longest and most severe punishment would be reserved for those who "slandered God by inventing Hell".[66]
[edit]Politics
Asimov became a staunch supporter of the Democratic Party during the New Deal, and thereafter remained a political liberal. He was a vocal opponent of the Vietnam War in the 1960s and in a television interview during the early 1970s he publicly endorsed George McGovern. He was unhappy about what he considered an "irrationalist" viewpoint taken by many radical political activists from the late 1960s and onwards. In his second volume of autobiography, In Joy Still Felt, Asimov recalled meeting the counterculture figure Abbie Hoffman; Asimov's impression was that the 1960s' counterculture heroes had ridden an emotional wave which, in the end, left them stranded in a "no-man's land of the spirit" from which he wondered if they would ever return.
He vehemently opposed Richard Nixon, considering him "a crook and a liar". He followed the unfolding events of Watergate day-to-day, and was pleased when the president was forced to resign. He was dismayed over the pardon extended to Nixon by his successor: "I was not impressed by the argument that it has spared the nation an ordeal. To my way of thinking, the ordeal was necessary to make certain it would never happen again."
Though Jewish by birth, Asimov appeared to hold an equivocal attitude towards Israel. In his first autobiography, he indicates his support for the safety of Israel, though remaining careful to insist he is by no means a Zionist."[67] However in his third autobiography, he clarifies his position by stating his opposition to the creation of a Jewish state, on the grounds that he is opposed to the concept of nation states in general, and supports the notion of a single humanity. He especially worries that Israel has been created amongst hostile neighbours, and that Jews have merely created for themselves another "Jewish ghetto". Asimov variously worries about the safety of Israel whilst denouncing its treatment of Palestinians.[68]
[edit]Social issues
Asimov considered himself a feminist even before Women's Liberation became a widespread movement; he joked that he wished women to be free "because I hate it when they charge".[69] More seriously, he argued that the issue of women's rights was closely connected to that of population control. Furthermore, he believed that homosexuality must be considered a "moral right" on population grounds, as must all consenting adult sexual activity that does not lead to reproduction.[70] He issued many appeals for population control, reflecting a perspective articulated by people from Thomas Malthus through Paul R. Ehrlich.[citation needed]
[edit]Environmental issues
Asimov's defense of civil applications of nuclear power even after the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant incident damaged his relations with some of his fellow liberals. In a letter reprinted in Yours, Isaac Asimov,[70] he states that although he would prefer living in "no danger whatsoever" than near a nuclear reactor, he would still prefer a home near a nuclear power plant than in a slum on Love Canal or near "a Union Carbide plant producing methyl isocyanate" (referring to the Bhopal disaster).
In the closing years of his life, Asimov blamed the deterioration of the quality of life that he perceived in New York City on the shrinking tax base caused by the middle-class flight to the suburbs. His last non-fiction book, Our Angry Earth (1991, co-written with his long-time friend science fiction author Frederik Pohl), deals with elements of the environmental crisis such as global warming and the destruction of the ozone layer.
[edit]Other authors
Asimov stated, both in his autobiography and in several essays, that he enjoyed the writings of J. R. R. Tolkien. He paid tribute to The Lord of the Rings in a "Black Widowers" story. (In his letter to Charlotte and Denis Plimmer, who had previously interviewed him for Daily Telegraph Magazine, Tolkien said that he enjoyed the science fiction of Isaac Asimov.)
He admired a number of his contemporaries, in particular fellow science-fiction author and science writer Arthur C. Clarke, with whom he entered into the lighthearted "Treaty of Park Avenue," which stipulated that Clarke was free to refer to himself as the best science fiction writer in the world (Asimov being second-best), provided he admitted that Asimov was the best science writer in the world (Clarke being second-best). He freely acknowledged a number of his fellow writers as superior to himself in talent, saying of Harlan Ellison, "He is (in my opinion) one of the best writers in the world, far more skilled at the art than I am."
[edit]Influence

Paul Krugman, a Nobel Laureate in Economics, has stated that it was Asimov's concept of psychohistory that inspired him to become an economist.[71]
John Jenkins, who has reviewed the vast majority of Asimov's written output, once observed:
It has been pointed out that most science fiction writers since the 1950s have been affected by Asimov, either modeling their style on his or deliberately avoiding anything like his style.[72][unreliable source?]
[edit]Television and film appearances

	This section requires expansion. (April 2011)
"To Tell The Truth", CBS, approximately 1968, playing the "real" Isaac Asimov. Only one panel member guessed correctly, on the grounds that Asimov wore glasses and somebody writing so many books would have to wear glasses.
The Nature of Things 1969
"ABC News" coverage of Apollo 11, 1969, with Fred Pohl, interviewed by Rod Serling
"David Frost" interview program, August 1969. This is the show in which Frost asked Asimov if he had ever tried to find God and, after some initial evasion, Asimov answered, "God is much more intelligent than I—let him try to find me."
The Dick Cavett Show 1970
Target... Earth? 1980
NBC TV, 1982 "Speaking Freely" interviewed by Edwin Newman 1982
ARTS Network talk show hosted by Studs Terkel and Calvin Trillin, approximately 1982. Other guests included Harlan Ellison and James Gunn. Asimov noted, during this interview, that science fiction wasn't necessarily predictive - pointing out that while writers did stories about going to the moon, and stories about television, not one wrote a story where men went to the moon while people at home watched on television.[citation needed]
Oltre New York 1986
Voyage to the Outer Planets and Beyond 1986
Bill Moyers interview 1988
Stranieri in America 1988
[edit]Selected bibliography

Further information: Isaac Asimov bibliography
Including all titles, charts, and edited collections, there are currently 515 items in Asimov's bibliography—not counting his individual short stories, individual essays, and criticism. For his 100th, 200th, and 300th books (based on his personal count), Asimov published Opus 100 (1969), Opus 200 (1979), and Opus 300 (1984), celebrating his writing; he did not choose to do this for his 400th book, however. Asimov's writings span all major categories of the Dewey Decimal Classification except for Philosophy. However, if his foreword for The Humanist Way is included, he has been published in all categories.[4]
According to UNESCO's Index Translationum database, Asimov is the world's 17th most-translated author, just behind Arthur Conan Doyle and ahead of Pope John Paul II.[73]
There is an online exhibit displaying features, visuals, and descriptions of some of the over 600 books, games, audio recordings, videos, and wall charts included in the West Virginia University Libraries’ virtually complete Asimov Collection. Many first, rare, and autographed editions are in the Libraries’ Rare Book Room. Book jackets and autographs are presented online along with descriptions and images of children’s books, science fiction art, multimedia, and other materials in the collection.[74]
For a listing of Asimov's books in chronological order within his future history, see the Foundation series list of books.
[edit]Science fiction
[edit]"Greater Foundation" series
The Robot series was originally separate from the Foundation series. The Galactic Empire novels were published as independent stories, set earlier in the same future as Foundation. Later in life, Asimov synthesized the Robot series into a single coherent 'history' that appeared in the extension of the Foundation series.
Main article: Isaac Asimov's Robot Series
Main article: Isaac Asimov's Galactic Empire Series
Main article: Foundation series
The Robot series:
The Caves of Steel. 1954. ISBN 0-553-29340-0. (first Elijah Baley SF-crime novel)
The Naked Sun. 1957. ISBN 0-553-29339-7. (second Elijah Baley SF-crime novel)
The Robots of Dawn. 1983. ISBN 0-553-29949-2. (third Elijah Baley SF-crime novel)
Robots and Empire. 1985. ISBN 978-0-586-06200-5. (sequel to the Elijah Baley trilogy)
Galactic Empire novels:
Pebble in the Sky. 1950. ISBN 0-553-29342-7. (early Galactic Empire)
The Stars, Like Dust. 1951. ISBN 0-553-29343-5. (long before the Empire)
The Currents of Space. 1952. ISBN 0-553-29341-9. (Republic of Trantor still expanding)
Original Foundation trilogy:
Foundation. 1951. ISBN 0-553-29335-4.
Foundation and Empire. 1952. ISBN 0-553-29337-0., Published with the title 'The Man Who Upset the Universe' as a 35c Ace paperback, D-125, in about 1952
Second Foundation. 1953. ISBN 0-553-29336-2.
Extended Foundation series:
Foundation's Edge. 1982. ISBN 0-553-29338-9.
Foundation and Earth. 1986. ISBN 0-553-58757-9. (last of the Foundation series)
Prelude to Foundation. 1988. ISBN 0-553-27839-8. (occurs before "Foundation")
Forward the Foundation. 1993. ISBN 0-553-40488-1. (occurs after "Prelude to Foundation" and before "Foundation")
[edit]Lucky Starr series (as Paul French)
Main article: Lucky Starr series
David Starr, Space Ranger (1952)
Lucky Starr and the Pirates of the Asteroids (1953)
Lucky Starr and the Oceans of Venus (1954)
Lucky Starr and the Big Sun of Mercury (1956)
Lucky Starr and the Moons of Jupiter (1957)
Lucky Starr and the Rings of Saturn (1958)
[edit]Norby Chronicles (with Janet Asimov)
Main article: Norby
Norby, the Mixed-Up Robot (1983)
Norby's Other Secret (1984)
Norby and the Lost Princess (1985)
Norby and the Invaders (1985)
Norby and the Queen's Necklace (1986)
Norby Finds a Villain (1987)
Norby Down to Earth (1988)
Norby and Yobo's Great Adventure (1989)
Norby and the Oldest Dragon (1990)
Norby and the Court Jester (1991)
[edit]Novels not part of a series
Novels marked with an asterisk * have minor connections to the Foundation series.
The End of Eternity (1955) *
Fantastic Voyage (1966) (a novelization of the movie)
The Gods Themselves (1972)
Fantastic Voyage II: Destination Brain (1987) (not a sequel to Fantastic Voyage, but a similar, independent story)
Nemesis (1989) *
Nightfall (1990), with Robert Silverberg (short story written by Asimov, novelized by Silverberg)
The Ugly Little Boy (1992), with Robert Silverberg (aka: Child of Time) (short story written by Asimov, novelized by Silverberg)
The Positronic Man (1993) *, with Robert Silverberg
[edit]Short story collections
See also List of short stories by Isaac Asimov
I, Robot. 1950. ISBN 0-553-29438-5.
The Martian Way and Other Stories. 1955. ISBN 0-8376-0463-X.
Earth Is Room Enough. 1957. ISBN 0-449-24125-4.
Nine Tomorrows. 1959. ISBN 0-449-24084-3.
The Rest of the Robots. 1964. ISBN 0-385-09041-2.
Through a Glass, Clearly. 1967. ISBN 0-86025-124-1.
Nightfall and Other Stories. 1969. ISBN 0-449-01969-1.
The Early Asimov. 1972. ISBN 0-449-02850-X.
The Best of Isaac Asimov. 1973. ISBN 0-7221-1256-4.
Buy Jupiter and Other Stories. 1975. ISBN 0-385-05077-1.
The Bicentennial Man and Other Stories. 1976. ISBN 0-575-02240-X.
The Complete Robot. 1982.
The Winds of Change and Other Stories. 1983. ISBN 0-385-18099-3.
The Alternate Asimovs. 1986. ISBN 0-385-19784-5.
The Best Science Fiction of Isaac Asimov. 1986.
Robot Dreams. 1986. ISBN 0-441-73154-6.
Azazel. 1988.
Robot Visions. 1990. ISBN 0-451-45064-7.
Gold. 1995. ISBN 0-553-28339-1.
Magic. 1996. ISBN 0-00-224622-8.
[edit]Mysteries
[edit]Novels
The Death Dealers (1958), republished as A Whiff of Death
Murder at the ABA (1976), also published as Authorized Murder
[edit]Short story collections
[edit]Black Widowers series
Tales of the Black Widowers (1974)
More Tales of the Black Widowers (1976)
Casebook of the Black Widowers (1980)
Banquets of the Black Widowers (1984)
Puzzles of the Black Widowers (1990)
The Return of the Black Widowers (2003)
[edit]Other mysteries
Asimov's Mysteries (1968)
The Key Word and Other Mysteries (1977)
The Union Club Mysteries (1983)
The Disappearing Man and Other Mysteries (1985)
The Best Mysteries of Isaac Asimov (1986)
The Feeling of Power (1967)
[edit]Nonfiction
[edit]Popular science
Collections of Asimov's essays – originally published as monthly columns in the Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction
Fact and Fancy (1962)
View from a Height (1963)
Adding a Dimension (1964)
Of Time, Space, & Other Things (1965)
From Earth to Heaven (1966)
Science, Numbers and I (1968)
The Solar System and Back (1970)
The Stars in Their Courses (1971)
The Left Hand of the Electron (1972)
The Tragedy of the Moon (1973)
Asimov On Astronomy (Udated Version Of Essays In Previous Collections) (1974) ISBN 978-0-517-27924-3
Asimov On Chemestry (Udated Version Of Essays In Previous Collections) (1974)
Of Matters Great & Small (1975)
Asimov On Physics (Udated Version Of Essays In Previous Collections) (1976) ISBN 978-0-385-00958-4
The Planet that Wasn't (1976)
Asimov On Numbers (Udated Version Of Essays In Previous Collections) (1976)
Quasar, Quasar, Burning Bright (1977)
Road to Infinity (1979)
The Sun Shines Bright (1981)
Counting the Eons (1983)
X Stands for Unknown (1984)
The Subatomic Monster (1985)
Far as Human Eye Could See (1987)
The Relativity of Wrong (1988)
Asimov On Science: A 30 Year Retrospective 1959-1989 (Features The First Essay In The Introduction) (1989)
Out of the Everywhere (1990)
The Secret of the Universe (1991)
Other science books by Asimov
The Chemicals of Life (1954) ISBN 978-0-451-62418-5
Inside the Atom (1956) ISBN 978-0-200-71444-0
Only a Trillion (Science Essay Collection) (1957) ISBN 978-0-441-63121-6
Building Blocks of the Universe (1957; revised 1974) ISBN 0-200-71099-0 ISBN 978-0200710992
The World of Carbon (1958) ISBN 978-0-02-091350-4
The World of Nitrogen (1958) ISBN 978-0-02-091400-6
Words of Science and the History Behind Them (1959) ISBN 978-0-395-06571-6
The Clock We Live On (1959) ISBN 978-0-200-71100-5
Asimov on Numbers (1959) ISBN 978-0-517-37145-9
The Wellsprings of Life (1960) ISBN 978-0-451-03245-4
Life and Energy (1962) ISBN 978-0-380-00942-8
The Human Body: Its Structure and Operation (1963) ISBN 978-0-451-02430-5, ISBN 978-0-451-62707-0 (revised)
The Human Brain: Its Capacities and Functions (1963) ISBN 978-0-451-62867-1
Planets for Man (with Stephen H. Dole) (1964, reprinted by RAND 2007) ISBN 978-0-8330-4226-2 [75]
The Intelligent Man's Guide to Science (1965)
The title varied with each of the four editions, the last being Asimov's New Guide to Science (1984) ISBN 978-0-14-017213-3
The Universe: From Flat Earth to Quasar (1966) ISBN 978-0-380-01596-2
The Neutrino (1966) ASIN B002JK525W
Understanding Physics Vol. I, Motion, Sound, and Heat (1966) ISBN 978-0-451-00329-4
Understanding Physics Vol. II, Light, Magnetism, and Electricity (1966) ISBN 978-0-451-61942-6
Understanding Physics Vol. III, The Electron, Proton, and Neutron (1966) ISBN 978-0-451-62634-9
Is Anyone There? (Science Essay Collection) (1967), ISBN 0-385-08401-3 – where he used the term Spome
Photosynthesis (1968) ISBN 978-0-465-05703-0
Our World in Space (1974) ISBN 978-0-8212-0434-4
Please Explain (Science Essay Collection) (1975) ISBN 978-0-440-96804-7
Asimov On Physics (1976) ISBN 978-0-385-00958-4
The Collapsing Universe (1977), ISBN 0-671-81738-8
Extraterrestrial Civilizations (1979) ISBN 978-0-449-90020-8
Visions of the Universe with coauthor Kazuaki Iwasaki (1981) ISBN 978-0-939540-01-3
Exploring the Earth and the Cosmos (1982) ISBN 978-0-517-54667-3
Asimov's Chronology of Science and Discovery (1989), second edition adds content thru 1993, ISBN 978-0-06-270113-8
Asimov's Chronology of the World (1991) ISBN 978-0-06-270036-0
Isaac Asimov's Guide to Earth and Space (1991) ISBN 978-0-449-22059-7
Atom: Journey Across the Subatomic Cosmos (1991) ISBN 978-1-4395-0900-5
Mysteries of deep space: Quasars, Pulsars and Black Holes (1994) ISBN 978-0-8368-1133-9
The Moon (2003), revised by Richard Hantula ISBN 978-1-59102-122-3
The Sun (2003), revised by Richard Hantula ISBN 978-1-59102-122-3
Jupiter (2004), revised by Richard Hantula ISBN 978-1-59102-123-0
The Earth (2004), revised by Richard Hantula ISBN 978-1-59102-177-3
Venus (2004), revised by Richard Hantula ISBN 978-0-8368-3877-0
[edit]Annotations
Asimov's Annotated "Don Juan"
Asimov's Annotated "Paradise Lost"
Asimov's Annotated "Gilbert and Sullivan"
Asimov's The Annotated "Gulliver's Travels"
Familiar Poems, Annotated
[edit]Guides
Asimov's Guide to the Bible, vols I and II (1981), ISBN 0-517-34582-X
Asimov's Guide to Shakespeare, vols I and II (1970), ISBN 0-517-26825-6
[edit]Autobiography
In Memory Yet Green: The Autobiography of Isaac Asimov, 1920–1954, (1979, Doubleday)
In Joy Still Felt: The Autobiography of Isaac Asimov, 1954–1978, (1980, Doubleday)
I. Asimov: A Memoir, (1994, Doubleday)
It's Been a Good Life, (2002), condensation of Asimov's three volume biography by his widow, Janet Jeppson Asimov
[edit]Other nonfiction
Opus 100 (1969), ISBN 0-395-07351-0
The Sensuous Dirty Old Man (1971) (As Dr. A), ISBN 0-451-07199-9
Isaac Asimov's Treasury of Humor (1971)
Asimov's Biographical Encyclopedia of Science and Technology (1st Revised Edition) (1972), ISBN 0-385-17771-2
Lecherous Limericks (1975), ISBN 0-449-22841-X
More Lecherous Limericks (1976), ISBN 0-8027-7102-5
Still More Lecherous Limericks (1977), ISBN 0-8027-7106-8
Limericks, Two Gross, with John Ciardi (1978), ISBN 0-393-04530-7
Opus 200 (1979), ISBN 0-395-27625-X
Our Federal Union (1975), ISBN 0-395-2283-3
Isaac Asimov's Book of Facts (1979), ISBN 0-517-36111-6
A Grossery of Limericks, with John Ciardi (1981), ISBN 0-393-33112-1
The Roving Mind (1983) (collection of essays). New edition published by Prometheus Books, 1997, ISBN 1-57392-181-5
Opus 300 (1984), ISBN 0-395-36108-7
Asimov Laughs Again (1992)
[edit]Selected Books by Dewey Decimal Category
Hallucination Orbit: Psychology In Science Fiction, (000)
Asimov's Guide to the Bible, (200)
Why are the Rain Forests Vanishing?, (300)
Words from History, (400)
Realm of Numbers, (500)
The Human Body: Its Structure and Operation, (600)
Visions of the Universe, (700)
The Do-It-Yourself Bestseller: A Workbook, (800)
The Greeks: A Great Adventure, (900)



Isaac Asimov Home Page

Welcome to the Isaac Asimov Home Page. Here you'll find a comprehensive collection of resources pertaining to Isaac Asimov (1920-1992), the quintessential author, who in his lifetime wrote over 500 books that enlightened, entertained, and spanned the realm of human knowledge.

The Isaac Asimov FAQ

The FAQ for the Usenet newsgroup alt.books.isaac-asimov provides answers to the frequently asked questions about Isaac Asimov, and is an excellent place to start if you have questions about him. Included is biographical information about both his personal life and his literary life, answers to questions about the Foundation and Robot series, and more.
For a German translation of the FAQ, see Bálint Krizsán's site.

Asimov featured in the Science Channel's Prophets of Science Fiction

The Science Channel's series Prophets of Science Fiction is executive producer Ridley Scott's exploration of how many of the fantastic ideas from the great minds of science fiction have become reality in the modern world. The February 15th episode highlighted Isaac's Asimov's robot stories, and the role robots play in such fields as surgery and space exploration. It will be rebroadcast on March 7 at 7 p.m.
The Isaac Asimov Memorial Panel Debate

Janet and Robyn Asimov, working with the American Museum of Natural History in New York City, established the Isaac Asimov Fund to support the annual Isaac Asimov Memorial Panel Debate as part of the Museum's Hayden Planetarium Programs. The twelfth annual debate will take place on the evening of March 20, 2012 in the museum's LeFrak Theater.
The topic of the 2012 debate will be "Faster Than the Speed of Light", concerning experiments by the OPERA collabaration at the underground Gran Sasso Laboratory which made headlines when they reportedly measured neutrinos moving faster than the speed of light.

The debate will once again be moderated by Neil DeGrasse Tyson, the Frederick P. Rose Director of the Hayden Planetarium, host of Nova Science Now on PBS, and author of Space Chronicles: Facing the Ultimate Frontier.

The featured panelists will be:

Dr. David Cline, Department of Physics and Astronomy, UCLA. Cline's research includes searches for a mass for mu or tau neutrinos, neutrino studies using the ICARUS detector at the Gran Sasso Laboratory in Italy, and attempts to detect primordial black holes.
Dr. Gian Giudice, Theoretical Physics Division, CERN. Giudice was the lead author of a paper that examined the consistency of the OPERA experiment with previous tests of special relativity.
Dr. Sheldon Glashow, Metcalf Professor of Mathematics and Physics, Boston University. Glashow shared the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1979 for his contributions to the theory of the unified weak and electromagnetic interaction between elementary particles.
Dr. Chris Hegarty, MITRE's Center for Advanced Aviation System Development. Hegarty is an expert on Global Positioning Satellites, whose accuracy depends upon precise measurements of the speed of light, and accounting for relativistic effects.
Dr. Laura Patrizii, Department of Physics, University of Bologna. Patrizii is a leader of the OPERA collaboration's Bologna group and was one of the coauthors of the paper that reported the neutrino velocity measurements.
Dr. Mike Shara, Curator of the Department of Astrophysics, AMNH. Shara's research aims to determine the mass of the stars nearest to Earth, and possibly account for the nature of dark matter.
Each of the previous debates were presented to a standing-room only audience.
Thanks to the many contributors, the Isaac Asimov Memorial Fund continues to grow. If you would like to participate in this extraordinary opportunity to perpetuate Isaac's memory and support the cause of science education, please read the details.

An article from Rotunda, the newsletter of the American Museum of Natural History in New York City, profiles the career of Dr. Janet Jeppson Asimov, her involvement with the museum, and the establishment of the Isaac Asimov Memorial Fund.

Asimov Recognized by Congress

Isaac Asimov was recognized by the 111th Congress on March 9, 2010 in House Resolution 1055, "supporting the designation of National Robotics Week as an annual event". The following passage appears in the text of the bill:
"Whereas the second week in April each year is designated as 'National Robotics Week', recognizing the accomplishments of Isaac Asimov, who immigrated to America, taught science, wrote science books for children and adults, first used the term robotics, developed the Three Laws of Robotics, and died in April, 1992: Now, therefore, be it resolved..."
The tribute to Asimov is due to the efforts of Paula Brooks, a robotics researcher and long-time fan of his who assisted the committee that wrote the resolution.
Black Widower's Collection: The Return of the Black Widowers

	A new collection of Isaac Asimov's Black Widower mystery stories was published by Carroll & Graf in November 2003. The Return of the Black Widowers features six stories that never appeared in a Black Widowers's collection, plus ten of the best previously collected Black Widower stories. It also includes an introduction by Asimov's close friend, author Harlan Ellison; a pastiche about the Black Widowers; and an essay by Asimov about how he came to write the Black Widowers stories. Also appearing in the collection is a new Black Widowers story, "The Last Story", written by Charles Ardai, the editor of the collection, for the December 2002 issue of Ellery Queen's Mystery Magazine, to commemorate the tenth anniversary of Asimov's death and the thirtieth anniversary of the publication of the first Black Widowers story.
The Return of the Black Widowers can be purchased from amazon.com.

Autobiography: It's Been a Good Life

	In late March, 2002, Prometheus Books published It's Been a Good Life, an autobiography edited by Janet Jeppson Asimov. The book was compiled from selections made from the three previous autobiographical volumes In Memory Yet Green (1979), In Joy Still Felt (1980), and I. Asimov: A Memoir (1994). The book also features "A Way of Thinking", Asimov's 400th essay for the Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction, which Janet put together from conversations they had and letters they had exchanged during many years of correspondence. In addition, there are excerpts from those letters sprinkled throughout the book. The result is a portrait of the life of Isaac Asimov, the writer, humanist, thinker, wit, and bon vivant, which lovingly illustrates why he was able to truthfully say "It's been a good life".
The book also includes an epilogue in which Janet Jeppson Asimov reveals for the first time that Isaac's 1992 death from heart and kidney failure was a consequence of AIDS contracted from a transfusion of tainted blood during his December 1983 triple-bypass operation. She explains how and when he learned he had the disease, and why his doctors convinced him to keep it a secret from the public. The epilogue includes a description of Asimov's final days, together with some poignant passages that describe his views of life and death.

[There were some erroneous published reports stating that it was Janet Asimov who convinced her husband to keep the fact that he had contracted AIDS a secret. This is absolutely untrue. In fact it was Asimov's doctors who urged that the matter be kept a secret. See Janet's April 4, 2002 letter to Locus magazine.]

The book can be purchased online from amazon.com or Barnes and Noble.

Lists of Asimov's Works

A catalogue of Asimov book titles, arranged by categories in the same fashion as in his autobiographies. (55k)
A list of Asimov's book titles, numbered in order of authorship, as known or estimated. (54k)
A "big list" of all known editions [that is, known by the list compiler, Ed Seiler] of Asimov's books, in order of publication. This includes title, publisher, year of publication, number of pages, size, Library of Congress call number, Dewey number, ISBN, and Library of Congress card catalog number. (183k) 
Note: This file has been formatted for 132 columns.
The "big list" in alphabetical order by title. (183k)
Note: This file has been formatted for 132 columns.
A guide to Asimov's short fiction. Every short story Asimov ever wrote is listed here. Indexes are provided that list works in each genre in order of publication, and an alphabetical index of titles lets you find an entry for any Asimov story title. Entries for each story cite where the story was first published, and list Asimov's collections and the anthologies in which the story appears. (77k)
A guide to Asimov's essays. Over 1600 of Asimov's essays are listed here, including the subject of the essay, the publication in which the essay first appeared, and a list of Asimov's collections in which the essay appeared. Indexes list the essays chronologically for each major series (e.g. the science essays in the Magazine of Fantasy and Science Fiction), and also group the essays by subject, in order to help you find any essay Asimov wrote on any given subject. (151k)
A list of books and articles about Asimov. (6k)
Johnny Pez's Insanely Complete Fiction List
A chronology of events in Isaac Asimov's positronic robot and Foundation stories, compiled by Johnny Pez.
A list of worlds mentioned in the Foundation series. (5k)
A list of Asimov works available on other media: records, audio tapes, videotapes, computer software, and board games. (14k)
Sources for Obtaining Asimov's Books

There are many websites that offer books for sale, and of course the number grows each day. A number of those are good sources for books by Asimov, and a few are listed here. Please note that the listing of these sites do not constitute an endorsement of their services.
Amazon.com Books: With millions of titles available, there is a good chance that you can find most of Asimov's books that are currently in print at Amazon.
The Advanced Book Exchange represents large numbers of independent used book dealers, and is a good source for hard-to-find books.
The Antiquarian Booksellers' Association of America offers out-of-print, collectible, and hard to find books. They are an association of booksellers who collectively sell books on the Internet. . Their selection of books by Asimov often includes a number of titles you may not have seen elsewhere.
AddAll offers searching and price comparisons.
Powell's Book Store is a large store in Oregon (reputed to be the largest bookstore west of the Mississippi) that has a website.
The Science Fiction Book Club sells its own editions of some of Asimov's science fiction books at discount prices.
And last, but not least, don't forget your local library as a source for borrowing books for reading.
Publishers of Asimov's Books on the Web

Prometheus Books published several of Asimov's essay collections.
Random House, whose Spectra imprint publishes most of Asimov's science fiction titles that are currently in print.
Doubleday (Doubleday Broadway Publishing Group, a division of Random House Inc.) has published more of Asimov's books than any other publisher.
Gareth Stevens Publishing has published 50 of Asimov's books for young people on science, technology, and explorers.
HarperCollins, published several of the more recent titles.
HarperCollins UK, whose Voyager imprint includes a substantial number of Asimov's books published in the UK.
Penguin Group published Asimov's books under several different imprints.
Tor Books is publishing new hardcover editions of Asimov's science fiction novels. Their website provides information about their science fiction and fantasy books, and has links to other SF resources on the web.
Houghton Mifflin Company has published 44 of Asimov's books, but there is no mention of him at their website.
Reviews

Jenkins' Spoiler-Laden Guide to Isaac Asimov is a collection of John Jenkins' reviews of every one of Isaac Asimov's books. Well, he hasn't actually reviewed all of Asimov's books yet, but he's working on it. John offers his views of what he likes and dislikes in Asimov's books from the point of view of a dedicated Asimov enthusiast, and provides a graphical rating system that neatly summarizes his evaluations for both the Asimov fan and the intended audience of each book. He has included reviews of Asimov's short fiction. John's opinions are highly personal, comprehensive, and clearly written, and definitely worth a look. He also has a blog of "random thoughts on one of the world's most prolific authors".
Search the science fiction review archives of the Science Fiction Resource Guide to view their collection of reviews of Asimov's books.
A Graph of Asimov's Book Publications

It took nineteen years for Asimov to publish his first 100 books, ten years to publish the next 100, and only five years to bring the total up to 300. Thanks to Tony Neilson, here is a graph of the number of books Asimov published each year throughout his career:


Some Items of Interest

Isaac Asimov's Birthplace

Isaac Asimov was born in Petrovichi, Russia, in 1920. Petrovichi is very proud of their native son, and have honored the place of his birth with a memorial stone. A picture was supplied by Alexander Azimov, who is almost certainly a relative of Isaac's.
Essays by Johnny Pez

Johnny Pez dispenses his knowledge in a series of essays:
The publishing history of the Positronic Robot and Foundation stories:

Part 1: 1940-1941
Part 2: 1941-1944
Part 3: 1944-1951
Part 4: 1954-1976
Part 5: 1973-1988
Part 6: 1989-1993
The publishing history of the Positronic Robot and Empire novels, 1947-1958
The Rise and Fall of the Spacers
Articles from the Encyclopedia Galactica:

Terminus
A Piece of History

By March 18, 1941, Isaac Asimov had written thirty-one stories, sold seventeen, and fourteen had been published. At that time, he considered himself nothing more than a third-rate writer. That evening, he sat down to write his thirty-second story, based on an idea suggested by Astounding editor John W. Campbell the day before. By April 8, he finished the story, titled "Nightfall", and on April 9 he took it to Campbell. Two days later, he received this letter from Campbell, and the history of science fiction was changed forever.
Cosmic Corkscrew

Science Fiction writer Michael A. Burstein pays homage to Isaac in Cosmic Corkscrew, his Hugo Award nominated story which appeared in the June 1998 issue of Analog, and honors the 60th anniversary of Asimov's submission of his first story to Astounding Science Fiction.
Asimov and Religion

Mike Brummond's scholarly essay Religion in Asimov's Writings considers the aspects of religion that appear in Asimov's fiction, and Asimov's views on religion, as expressed in his nonfiction.
Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine

Asimov's Science Fiction Magazine has a website containing feature articles, excerpts from upcoming issues, book reviews, online interviews, reprints of Isaac Asimov's editorials, and much more.
The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction

Home to Isaac Asimov's monthly science column for over thirty-three years, The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction, founded in 1949, is the award-winning SF magazine which is the original publisher of SF classics like Stephen King's Dark Tower, Daniel Keyes's "Flowers for Algernon" and Walter M. Miller's A Canticle for Leibowitz. The website has selections from recent and upcoming issues, current issue contents, writer's guidelines, and subscription information.
Other Asimov Resources

The Encyclopedia Galactica is the ultimate reference work for the universe detailed in Isaac Asimov's robot, Galactic Empire, and Foundation stories. Providing information on people, chronology, robotics, and other topics, it is published by the Encyclopedia Galactic Publishing Co., via the efforts of Mike Carlin of Bristol, England.
The Imperial Galaxy, a gallery of original artwork illustrating the Foundation universe, brought to us by Slawek Wojtowicz.
In the early sixties, Asimov regularly contributed book reviews to The Horn Book, a children's literary review journal, who marked their 75th anniversary in October 1999. At their virtual history exhibit is a letter from Asimov to an editor at Horn Book, after he received an unexpectedly large payment, asking to make sure that he wasn't overpaid.
The Life & Times section of the New York Times website also features articles by and about Asimov, as well as reviews of Asimov's books that appeared in the Times (registration required).
Science Fiction writer Michael A. Burstein, winner of the 1997 John Campbell Award for Best New Writer, remembers Isaac Asimov in "Asimov and Me", first published in the Fanzine Mimosa in December 1997.
A 1988 interview with Asimov by Slawek Wojtowicz, a science fiction fan from Poland.
The transcript of a lecture by Asimov on the future of humanity.
An obituary for Isaac that appeared in Newsday.
A chronology of Asimov's Susan Calvin stories, robot novels, galactic empire novels and Foundation series.
An essay by Robert J. Sawyer on why the Three Laws of Robotics aren't used in the real world.
A Few Science Fiction Resources

The Science Fiction resource guide offers links to a multitude of science fiction resources on the net.
The Index to Science Fiction Anthologies and Collections, Combined Edition by William Contento should help you find an enormous number of science fiction stories and anthologies published before 1984, and Science Fiction, Fantasy, & Horror: 1984-1998 covers everything since then.
Blastr, a professional electronic publication of science fiction news and reviews.